# Grizzly-rewilding

## Files
### fuzzy membership splus functions.R - 
start here for functions required later in the script
### MPG Ranch.R- 
primary code for the project, includes fuzzy interaction web set up and testing, as well as sensitivity analysis related to ecological effects of grizzly bears (competition, predation, scavenging, herbivory, and all combined)
### Alternate conditions final.R- 
script for sensitivity analysis related to global change conditions in the fuzzy interaction web (invasive plant management, human hunting, and precipitation). The sensitivity analyses in this script are partially dependent on the MPG Ranch.R file for fuzzy membership functions and starting node values

## Abstract
Rewilding is gaining traction as a conservation strategy, sometimes passively via recolonization by functionally important species via legal protection and changes in harvest regimes. Yet, a critical question is how ecological systems re-equilibrate in the presence of species that have been absent from the landscape. Such changes have been exceedingly difficult to predict due to complex direct and indirect interactions, particularly given the backdrop of concurrent anthropogenic changes. The ongoing re-expansion of grizzly bears (Ursus arctos) in the western United States provides an opportunity to assess and predict the ecological effects of the reappearance of a large, generalist carnivore. Using fuzzy interaction webs, we constructed an interaction network to predict how the expansion of grizzly bears into their historic range affected other species in the ecosystem via direct and indirect interactions under concurrent anthropogenic effects. Our model indicates that grizzly bears will reduce populations of other large carnivores, scavenging birds, and ungulates through a combination of direct competition, indirect competition, and predation. Moreover, these negative impacts were exacerbated by anthropogenic drivers like human hunting, exotic plant invasions, and drought (climate change). Other species like mesopredators are predicted to be less affected by grizzly bear re-expansion. These results provide a novel understanding of how rewilding may affect ecological systems through complex rewiring of interaction networks. They also indicate how the negative effects of carnivore range re-expansion on sympatric species could, in some cases, be ameliorated by management of invasive species and hunting. Our analytical framework is broadly applicable, facilitating prediction about ecological impacts of ongoing re-wilding around the globe.
